when the rms titanic went down after
crashing into an iceberg
on april 14 1912 hundreds of people
perished in the freezing waters of the
northern atlantic ocean
one of the main reasons all these people
were left to wait for rescue in 28
degree water
which would all too quickly claim lives
before that rescue came
was that the titanic didn't have enough
lifeboats for all its passengers
there were only 20 and they needed 60 to
be
able to carry everybody on board to
safety
as for why there was such a drastic
shortage of lifeboats
that's because there had been complaints
that the deck was too cluttered looking
when they did have a sufficient amount
what's even worse the first few
lifeboats that were released after the
collision
weren't even filled up halfway which
could have saved so many more lives
perhaps those poor souls could have been
rescued from the bone-chilling waters a
lot sooner
if the closest ships passing by the
titanic's crash site
had seen the flares and other distressed
signals being set
but many of them didn't because of
something called light refraction
this phenomenon could also explain why
the titanic's lookouts hadn't seen the
iceberg until it was too late
there are others however who say that
this was because of the fact
that they didn't have binoculars long
story short
they didn't have the key to the onboard
cabinet where all the binoculars were
stored
because the only guy who had that key
second officer david blair
was replaced at the last minute and
forgot to hand the key over
if the crew had had binoculars to help
them perhaps they would have noticed the
iceberg early enough to change
course and miss it the ship was also
moving much faster than the speed it was
built for the reason for this was that
the ship's owner
white star line didn't want to fall
behind schedule
in fact they wanted to get ahead of
schedule and surprise the world to make
headlines for arriving early
maybe if the titanic had been sailing at
a safer speed
it would have had time to steer away
from the iceberg
even if it had noticed a little too late
due to the lack of binoculars
anyway there was a whole series of
unfortunate events
leading to the ship's collision and the
fact that so many people were left
unrescued
and their bodies not retrieved
so back to that question one theory
about where the bodies might have gone
is that they were lost at sea
only hours after the titanic sank a
massive storm came over the ocean
the currents and winds would have swept
many bodies up to 50 miles away from the
crash site
this could explain why the first ships
to arrive at the scene
didn't find them but in reality
the titanic shouldn't have been on the
water in the first place
experts have now discovered that the
ship's hull had been weakened by a huge
fire that broke out during the
construction process three weeks before
the date of departure
and white star line was fully aware of
the damage that had been done
but they decided to sweep it under the
rug
as fate would have it the iceberg hit
this exact weakened spot
tearing a huge hole in the ship allowing
the waters to flood in
and sending her to the depths of the
ocean
the titanic made two successful stops in
france and
ireland before sailing off to new york
on april 14th
the crew received reports of ice
sightings from other ships
but the titanic's path was clear and the
sea was calm
at 11 30 pm a lookout spotted a 100 foot
tall iceberg straight ahead
and immediately warned the captain
because the ship was moving
at top speed the crew only had 37
seconds to try to avoid a collision the
titanic's engines were reversed
and the ship was turned so that it
wouldn't hit the iceberg straight on
it instead grazed the ice
which punctured a 300-foot gash in the
side of the ship's hall
after the impact the captain sent out
distress signals
which were picked up by the carpathia
one of canard's ships
the carpathia immediately sailed at full
speed to the rescue
while trying to avoid icebergs itself
the olympic was on its way to new york
when it got the titanic's distress
signal
it turned around at once and also sped
off to assist its sinking sister
unfortunately it had to travel more than
500 miles to reach her
having calculated that the ship would
only stay afloat for an hour and a half
the captain and chief engineer rushed to
order an evacuation
chaos ensued and it took them almost an
hour to lower the first lifeboat
which had only 28 people on board versus
the 65
it had space for in the end
the titanic actually stayed afloat for
almost three hours
during that time families were separated
as women and children were loaded onto
the lifeboats first
as the law of the sea dictated
ava miriam hart was only seven years old
when she boarded the titanic with her
parents
according to ava her mother couldn't
sleep at all the whole time she was on
board
because she'd had a really bad
premonition about the trip
while the titanic was sinking ava's
father ran to their cabin
wrapped ava in a blanket and placed his
wife and daughter
in lifeboat number 14. the last thing he
told ava was
hold mommy's hand and be a good girl
ava went on to do many things throughout
her life
she was a singer in australia and a very
outspoken
activist when it came to the whole
titanic ordeal
she even wrote an autobiography called
shadow of the titanic
a survivor story
one person eva heart probably had a bone
to pick with
was joseph bruce ismae
well she and plenty of others ismey was
chairman of the white star line the
company that operated the titanic
he was on the ship that night survived
the sinking
and was rescued in collapsible lifeboat
sea
upon arriving in the u.s he got a ton of
heat for leaving the titanic
while there were still women and
children on board
after the titanic he tried to live a
quiet life
out of the spotlight he continued
dealing in maritime affairs
although not so much with passenger
liners and more with the british
merchant navy
professional tennis player richard
norris williams was on board the titanic
with his father
given that the lifeboats as many know
were reserved for women and children
these two guys were left to fend for
themselves on a sinking ship
they did pretty well at first but once
the ship had sunk deep enough to leave
the remaining passengers floating in the
water
a huge smokestack suddenly collapsed and
crashed down on the surface of the water
perhaps it was purely coincidental or
maybe something more
but the resulting wave washed richard
toward collapsible lifeboat a
so he climbed in unfortunately
that lifeboat was full of freezing water
that passengers had to stand in
up to their knees these survivors were
later transferred to lifeboat number 14
but the damage of the cold water had
already been done
williams got frostbite on his legs and
once on board the carpathia
the doctors recommended amputating both
his lower limbs
but the tennis star would have none of
it so he exercised every day
and his legs slowly recovered he even
continued his tennis career
became an olympic gold medalist and
served in the army
he later became a successful investment
banker and president of the historical
society of pennsylvania
why didn't people try climbing on the
iceberg to get out of the water
because it was too slippery okay thanks
for joining me today on the bright side
wait there's more right back to our
story
at first this seemed to be an easy fix
but as i started to look into it
i found some logistical problems that
would make it more like a frozen
nightmare than a frosty lifeboat
in the meantime let's talk about slopes
ice slopes to be specific you probably
don't need me to tell you that an
iceberg isn't just a giant ice cube in
the ocean
but it's essential to draw a distinction
between a nice flow
and an iceberg we'll save ice capades
for another time
a flow spelled f-l-o-e is a flat
mass of ice found drifting in the ocean
much like
icebergs they're the result of arctic
ice breaking away from a larger shelf
but that's pretty much where the
similarities end a flow
is low flat and relatively shallow while
an iceberg is
none of those things you may have heard
the expression tip of the iceberg
well the towering spire of frozen water
you know and fear
is only a small part of the iceberg's
mass
the bulk of an iceberg is found under
the water and this
is the part most dangerous to passing
ships ramming into a giant hunk of
anything is never good but when the
damage is underwater
things go from bad to worse pretty fast
ice floes can be hazardous but the
concern is that a ship might get pinned
and
crushed between two of them instead of
sinking out right
this is only a real possibility when
close to or within the arctic circle
the titanic may have been in the north
atlantic but not quite that far north
no the titanic hit an iceberg and if you
look at any picture of an iceberg
you'll see that they can get quite steep
sure some might be scalable
but others are nothing but sheer cliffs
of jagged eyes
best case it would be like climbing a
mountain worst case
a frozen cliffside there are several
images purported to show the iceberg
that did the deed
but the most likely culprit is the one
here
now i don't know about you but that
doesn't exactly strike me as an
easy climb now imagine trying to pull
that off in the dark
using only your hands and maybe a bit of
rope and surrounded by over a thousand
other confused and freezing people
and don't imagine for a second that it
would be an orderly evacuation either
remember while the lack of lifeboats was
a big problem for the titanic
a much bigger one was the fact that more
than half left
only partially full as the window of
opportunity to see the site closes
american company ocean gate offers trips
down to the wreck
the first trip carrying tourists was
supposed to head down in 2018
but the weather wasn't favorable so it
was pushed back to 2019
ocean gate has already conducted trips
to the titanic
but tourists have never been allowed on
board
dives to the titanic have collected data
gathered samples and taken pictures
another company called the blue fish has
planned
trips to the rack in 2019 and 2020.
their submersible has a seven inch
acrylic window to get the best
view as news breaks that the titanic is
deteriorating
more and more commercial companies are
bound to offer submersible trips to the
wreck
if you think you can just head down and
come back up the same day
the reality is a bit more complicated
the journey to the wreck involves an
eight day trip
which leaves from newfoundland canada
passengers board a submersible made of
titanium and carbon fiber
after all as you descend into the dark
depths
the water pressure increases and you
don't want a submersible made of flimsy
materials
once inside the sub you'll descend a
distance of 12
500 feet to the ocean floor the distance
isn't so
far if you were on land on land it would
be like
heading to your nearest grocery store
but when you think of twelve thousand
five hundred feet
in terms of a vertical distance dropping
down
into the darkness the reality of it all
might be enough to send shivers down
your spine
as you descend bioluminescent creatures
are likely to make an appearance
the darkness is so intense at this depth
that sea life has developed
its own way of making light it'll take
about 90 minutes to make your way down
during which time you can go through all
the stages of grief and panic
maybe you'll start with denial i can't
be in a submarine
what was i thinking this is too scary
get me out
and then there's anger get me out or
i'll scream
uh how about bargaining uh if you bring
the sub
up i'll pay a double perhaps even
depression
oh what have i done the window will
crack and we'll all drown
finally there's acceptance oh the sub
seems to be alright
this is actually really cool after an
emotional roller coaster
the magnificent sight of the rack will
meet your eyes
and you'll get a 360 degree view of the
titanic
which you can enjoy for around three
hours depending on the submersible
company
you'll be able to see the deck the bow
the ship's propellers
the macaroni room i mean the marconi
room
where the wireless operator sent the sos
as the ship was sinking
and the cavern that was home to the
grand staircase
which is now really famous in addition
you'll probably be able to spot a few
personal objects lying on the ocean
floor mostly shoes and bags
that belong to the titanic's passengers
so what would a modern day titanic
scenario
look like well a good example might be
what happened during the 2012
costa concordia disaster sure this
shipwreck occurred in the warm waters of
the mediterranean
and the concordia struck a rock rather
than an iceberg
but the aftermath was similar enough
that some comparisons can be drawn
the full story is as follows the italian
cruise ship was passing close to the
island of julio
when it collided with the edge of an
underwater plateau
believing he knew the channel well
enough to navigate on his own
the captain had disabled the collision
alarm for the costa concordia's onboard
navigation system
it was later revealed that there were
numerous distractions on the ship
such as the presence of the captain's
girlfriend
unlike the titanic the concordia had
more than enough lifeboats to get
everyone off safely
unfortunately no amount of policy reform
can completely make up for human error
and poor communication
and failure to follow emergency
procedures delayed the evacuation by
more than half an hour by the time the
order to abandon ship had been given
the costa concordia was already
beginning to list
so severely that the crew was unable to
launch many of the lifeboats
when the surf settled 33 people lost
their lives
and another 64 had been injured as bad
as that was
things could have been much worse since
the location of concordia's collision
did the passengers and crew a number of
unexpected favors
for starters they were within side of
land when the accident happened
this meant that help arrived reasonably
quickly once the captain got around
ascending his sos
in fact with the help of their life
jackets many passengers were able to
swim
all the way to solid ground no one would
be swimming very far if they'd struck an
iceberg in the north atlantic
when the titanic sank it was about 400
miles from dry land
and the water was a freezing 28 degrees
the good news is that in the modern
world things might never have gotten to
that point
if the titanic had struck the iceberg
today the coast guard would have
deployed a small fleet of boats and
helicopters to assist in the evacuation
not just that but every ship in the area
would have made a b
line for their coordinates the moment
that sos message went out
with a competent commander overseeing an
organized evacuation
this modern titanic might not be
considered a disaster at all
on the other hand costa concordia shows
what can happen
when safety precautions are ignored